ladies and gentlemen please welcome vice
president of development technologies
Ted goldstein good afternoon what an
amazing day it's been so far I hope to
keep this on a roll we have a lot to
talk about I want to give you a quick
agenda what we're going on give you an
update on what we've done this last year
with the Xcode tool suite and then talk
about something everybody cares about
its performance then where we're going
with what's next the future for xcode
and the compiler and runtime which is
such an important part of making
applications great on Mac OS 10
performance tools are critical critical
part of how you make your application
faster and we want to give you all the
help not just making the compiler
produced great code for you but also
give you the assistance it takes to make
the perform your applications really
perform and then finally how can you use
xcode with all the great frameworks and
SDKs you sort this morning in this
afternoon so let's just write in and
give you a quick update on the echo 20
sweet so in this last year we put out
three releases of Xcode 101 dot11 dot 2
and 1 dot 0 was the what's the feature
release it had predicted compilation 0
link fixed continue distributed builds
smart groups and code sets a very rich
build in 1001 was too we elaborated and
enhance both performance capabilities of
that the stability and robustness of it
and filled in a few of the missing
details and workflow issues third-party
tools quickly jumped in bbedit and subby
that edit and perforce almost
immediately out of the gate was great
third-party support to show that xcode
was not just our and ireland by itself
but included access for other tools in
it in the one that one time frame we had
added support for ibm's terrific xlc and
xls C C++ and Fortran and Objective C
compilers and that is great safe port
our benefit to the platform we're
with IBM they of course also helped
develop the 970 CPU the g5 processor
that apple shipped and the combination
is incredible much of the great
scientific computing that's been done
over the years has been done in Fortran
it's been like I can remember is it
undergraduate in school that we said I
don't know what language people will be
using in the year 2000 but it will be
named Fortran well it's still true it's
still named Fortran and it's a great
language and they've been doodles of
template and other components and
capabilities that add to Xcode this
includes conduits and other cut and
Apple script plugins and such that
really round out the corners of making
Xcode terrific and you've responded with
over 300,000 downloads of these tools
and that's i want to thank you very much
i think that's an incredible show
support for the platform of course it's
great to have the volume of users using
the tools and it's also extremely
important us to be working with our
important developer partners folks like
adobe are helping us to make xcode and
GCC terrific for their tools here's a
quote from fateh berman lead architect
and head of indesign and we think it's
just an incredible thing to be working
with partners because frankly a large
code base such as in design takes a lots
of resources to to port it to a new
environment and as well for us to help
the compiler really encompass such a
such an enormous code base we learn and
improve the products for all of our
developments with each step we also see
this as well with quark and Clark has
been a fabulous partner working with us
to make Xcode grey and we find that it's
so important so important to to be doing
this process in partnership with these
key developers of course this morning we
heard from meijer engineering from bob
bennett and here are very happy to say
that Maya six and my HP credible
credible applications developed with
Xcode that
using the benefit the productivity
benefit into performance gains that
Xcode and GCC provides to deliver on g5
performance so that has been an amazing
thing now i want to invite rich siegel
CEO of bare bones edit they won't
software sorry to talk a little bit
about building bbedit with xcode thank
you very much dead good afternoon
everybody it's great to be here so when
Apple announced exod a year ago almost
today in fact we were really intrigued
that bare bones software we've got a
long history of course not only
experience using developer tools but
also some of them have some of us have
worked on them and we know that a
diversity of developer tools is a good
thing to have it's good for the
ecosystem it makes a better developer
experience and that makes a better
platform so when X go 1 point 0 ships in
October we took a good close look at it
we kick the tires and we thought about
what's really important to us when it
comes to making better products to serve
our customers and came down to really
three simple things the first ones
compiler quality and here great job in
Xcode TCC is an excellent compiler and
I'll get into that shortly the next
thing was build productivity usually the
first thing we do when there's a
platform change such as a new hardware
platform or a new tools platform is
we'll sit down and we'll without a
stopwatch we'll see how long it takes to
build our product line and finally the
really important thing for us was to be
able to continue using as many of our
existing tools as we could so on the
first front compiler quality well TCC is
a great compiler its language
conformance is very good and what we
found was when we turned on all the
warnings which Xcode makes really easy
to do because it's a great GUI for GCC
is you know we went through we turned on
all the warnings and we found a few
latent bugs and we found some good code
quality improvements and so the result
is we have a cleaner codebase it's more
maintainable and we can run it through
even more compilers such as for example
xlc if we
choose also the generated code is
favored really comfortable to pretty
much everything else we've used we gave
up nothing in code quality the next
thing as we mentioned was the
productivity improvement of build times
and there what we found that was that
was distributed builds we were seeing
about a thirty to forty percent decrease
in build times compared to building on a
single machine so we have a little bit
less time to get a cup of coffee while
we're building but in spite of that it
turns into a real productivity
improvement the beautiful thing about
that however was that we were able to
realize this improvement without any
capital investment whatsoever we didn't
have to go out and drop 20 grand on a
dedicated build part instead we were
able to use existing hardware in the
office administration workstations
engineering work stations operations
marketing even the machine that drives
our CD duplicators part of the inhales
build farm so no capital expense of free
thirty to forty percent in build times
it was like having our cake and eating
it too it just didn't get any better
finally of course was the ability to use
our own tools in here this was crucial
and the external editor support in xcode
was great I mean can you imagine us not
using bbedit so we were really pleased
to be able to do that and in fact on the
converse not being able to do that
would've them a real deal breaker so I'm
happy to say that as a result of treaty
of really meeting through these three
basic tests compiler quality
productivity through building
performance and being able to use our
existing tools all of our product
development with the exception of
maintaining current shipping versions
but all of our products bbedit
textwrangler Mayo Smith and super get
info are being built with Xcode today so
I just wanted to thank Ted and his team
for delivering a great tool chain
thank you ready it's so important and we
focus on performance in every part of
the development cycle spoke on the build
time the launch time the runtime and
development in debug time and each of
these areas is critically critically
important with Xcode one point oh we
placed immense amount of emphasis on the
backfill time that what you do in the
office in this last year though a lot of
people said to us Ted you know that's
great when I'm in the office and I can
use distributed bills what about when
I'm sitting in a cafe drinking that cup
of coffee on my laptop and there of
course we sold this last year we have
turned our attention really from the the
the main office built on to really the
cafe bill time if you work with and so
I'm happy to say that now extra bills
performance is thirty-three percent
faster on laptops we also get another
eighteen percent improvement on dual
process of machines as well and so we
think of these things is incredibly
important and we will continue to make
improvements on each of the areas i
think that it's critically important to
realize that GCC at the heart of this is
already an amazingly fast compiler we
already and we're innovating in multiple
ways one of the most important ways that
we're doing this is something you think
of a short cut compilation and that is
we are ignoring unnecessary declarations
and short-circuiting unnecessary
recompilation what's an unnecessary
recompilation for example when you hit a
space or put in a comment really the
text and program meaning of the code
hasn't changed but just the just the
only the white space if you will of the
program is change and so this is coming
out it didn't make your DVDs but will be
in a future download beta coming along
soon now let's turn our attention over
the launch performance the time it takes
for the program to start up Mac os10 has
seen continuous evolution of the Marco
object file format among the kick the
capabilities that we typically advise
people is to prove
applications cream binding is the set of
setting up the your application for a
given release so that the addresses of
the librarians are already located in
the executable text segment but but the
feedback on pre binding has not been
good this is a great comment from on
insanity org I really hate the fact that
Mac os10 requires be binding for Marco
applications and their whole websites
pre binding is painful it's time
consuming it's error-prone and now I'd
like to say that it's unnecessary for
most applications starting in Jaguar but
continue on in Panther and then
resulting in some work that we we
finally put it all together in 10 3 4 we
made it so that provide Maya sick for
example one custom that we work with who
was taking their application from CSM to
Marco originally in an unproven believe
and the opportunity bound state takes
about 48 seconds to launch and that kind
of it pins on on the development cycle
in the pre pounds state it takes about
12 seconds and intends to be four and
tiger it takes only five seconds in the
not in the dynamically down not pre
bound state why should we do this so
fast because we put in important things
like to level main phases and hint to
help to quickly find symbol so it's not
searching all of your address space as
it's the binding is going on but it's
all but it's doing that very quickly and
searching a very small subset so this is
an important technology and I think it's
very helpful r2 that has in Tiger we
didn't made it one step further with
studying instincts applications like
Safari for example these are some
preliminary measurements where we have
both the pre binding and the dynamically
BAM the pre map state is no difference
we cannot tell the difference now you
should always you know this is a preview
release we want to hear your feedback so
please do some studies but we believe
that pre binding is no longer necessary
so that's pre binding
so what's the next to Xcode with Xcode
we have what do we see I think Peter had
already spent on the RSS feed so we
already saw some of the press release is
hitting any Apple news site that there
is going to be an Xcode two point oh but
in fact there are two releases next code
154 Panthers and an Xcode 2.0 on tiger
and we've gotten this sequence you've
given us the feedback that says you know
Ted it's great for us to get the next
release but we don't to wait that long
and we want to use the new tools and
features that you have on the current
operating system that were shipping
today so X sub 1 point 5 contains most
of the goodies are that two point O has
suddenly everything that that can work
in 15 context it doesn't take advantage
of important frameworks and new features
that are two that are tiger only so
we're going to try to do this I'm not
going to make a firm commitment but
definitely we've heard you that you that
you want to have great tools at the same
time as you have the forward-looking
toward so let's focus in first on one
side and really 15 is the feature
release where we focused on the features
of a sport principally among that is an
important feature called dead coach
dripping essentially removing the
unnecessary code out of a program we
also realized that even though we're
doing the pretty amazing formatting and
code sense you also want to have faster
edit performance and edit performance is
improved in many cases by 10 X and even
warrant in for the very large file
I think what I'm saying that we love
java and Apple script but we're then
what the code says supports in Xcode and
in 15 you've got it you've got support
for code sense and incremental
compilation mix and and and many other
build system teachers in putting in for
java and Apple script you'll see some of
that later today and finally subversion
he I thought I'd have to explain to you
what subversion was so for the two
people knew who don't know subversion is
a new version of CBS or a a CVS type
system source code management system its
many people believe it is the logical
successor to CBS all rights done by the
same folks who did webdav so it has a
terrific network orientation and so now
if the version support is built into
Xcode 15 we've also made a number of
debugger improvements and I want to
bring up Chris freezing and Gabriel
flight states are from trans gaming
thanks Ted so I trans gaming we work on
software portability tools for the
entertainment software industry
specifically what that means is that we
work to provide tools and technologies
to allow developers and publishers to
take their games for one platform to
another very quickly and cheaply now
we've been working on a title called
Tron to point out which was recently
released in fact it can actually go to
compusa and can pick it up in the stores
and one of the things we weren't into a
lot and we're dealing with porting games
is the fact that a game by its nature
takes a huge amount of CPU huge amounts
of RAM and most importantly wants to
actually take over your entire desktop
and lock your medicine into that window
so try to debug a game in a on a single
CPU can be extremely difficult in
cumbersome you have to kind of change
your rendering code to put into a window
and and and share the RAM especially
with huge symbols that you get with with
some of these large projects so one of
the features that Xcode 1.5 provides
we've been playing with the last week or
so is cross machine debugging what we're
going to show you here is running the
game 20 point 0 on one machine while
debugging it on a completely different
machine now Chris reason has been
intensively training in the Tron to
point a light cycle game over the course
of the lunch break and he's going to
he's going to demonstrate that the
result of that training please Chris go
ahead we have sound on the game machine
oh oh now you know I I believe you i was
watching Christian I believe this
problem is not it's not the chris didn't
train enough the problem here is really
something very different something that
you wouldn't necessarily expect on a
light cycle but i think chris is going
to go here he's going to show you like
the character he was set up to play and
clearly the problem here is that his
character had spiky hair it was impeding
the air flow in a life cycle it just it
just wasn't working so we're going to
switch over to actually we're not going
to talk or yet what I'm going to do here
is I'm actually going to go on this
machine and activate a break point
you'll see that the game machine is
stopped let's choose over to the bugger
machine for a moment and what we're
going to see on the debugger machine is
the actual code that's executing at this
point which is in the middle of trends
gaming's proprietary director ed
rendering technology which allows us to
take games written for win32 and bring
them to other platforms and we've got
we've got a little extra piece of code
here that I that I added that can deal
with the whole spiky hair problem if a
certain kind of rendering is happening
we're just going to mask it right out
all right so let me go back to the
breakpoints and disable that one and
let's go back to the game machine and on
the game machine will see that we have
we haven't actually continued yet on the
game machine we will still see the spiky
hair and I'm gonna hit continue on the
debugger and boom the spiky hair problem
is gone so Chris will not have any more
trouble with with the light cycles next
time around you know thanks very much
that's the demo thanks Ted how would I
said
remote debugging is also truly important
when you're on two machines what's the
one other thing I'm sorry was there one
other thing there is one other thing
it's going to take us a second to get
all ready we'll run that will run that
right before your neck so gentle okay
great so remote debugging numerous other
features in terms of global that support
the adult rate expressions and host of
interesting features you'll see in as
well in the 2 point 0 demo so let's go
to a tron level 2 i mean xcode level two
so a very big part of what people care
about is to be able to launch quickly
into their application and quickly over
to xcode you want to actually see our
expert laid out in a way that's similar
and very good for you so we've added a
number of important new layout that that
are extremely familiar for people from
both the visual studio and codewarrior
world we also saw earlier today on Jenna
spanker gives the modeling with a
database that same modeling technology
is also available for object-oriented
programming for java objective c c c++
and we think that's going to be a very
big help to you even if you're not doing
database programming that's on the flood
says in the back end we've added support
for GCC 35 and 64-bit tools GCC 35 is
the next generation of GCC and it has
some amazing performance features some
of which are being innovated by Apple
and IBM working together and 64-bit
support so that you can generate to take
advantage of the full address space seem
to spend and some time talking about
that too there are also important use
performance tools and some incredible
SDKs that Xcode is essentially the
gateway to to get to the traditional
Xcode layout is all very nice and
compact and very late and it has a
number of great features but one of the
things of course is to have the debugger
you have to open up a separate window
and that kind of takes your mind away
from it okay we're looking at the
console window
often times to actually see it you're
then doing your own window management
and one of the things that's very
popular on in Microsoft platform visual
studio world is an all-in-one view where
everything is nice and compact and so
we've added this now x.x code you have a
new all-in-one view that essentially
puts the debugger the all of the tools
embedded within spiraling frame of Xcode
but of course it's not it's important to
to have a quick and easy way to
switching see this is a new toolbar icon
on the top to be able to rapidly switch
function from one to the other the other
important size of things is this idea of
a condensed view people familiar with
code where they'll have many many
windows spawns or of a central palette
and that also is a new part of what
Xcode to point o supports so these two
incredible features i think help and why
don't we take a look at this and some of
the new features let's bring Matt
Froelich and Chris Espinosa up to give a
demo of x co 2 point 0
thanks Eddie X go to one dot 5 and x co
2 point 0 are replete with features we
only have a short time today so Chris
and I are going to demo two of them but
we encourage you to go to the rest of
the sessions this week to check out some
of those additional features in addition
to being a standard ide Xcode provides a
number of facilities for dealing with
large problems that you have let's stick
on the whole concept of debugging for a
moment global variables kind of a
necessary evil in working everybody has
them and even if you have more than
those just in your application there are
potentially thousands in all the shared
libraries that your application loads as
being an application on Mac OS 10
question is how do you deal with it how
do you figure out the value how do you
keep track of those as part of your
development works like new and Xcode
we're providing the ability to look at
global variables in your application in
a very simple and easy manner what
you'll see right now is that Chris has
launched an application called Celestia
it's a freely downloadable application
for looking at 3d renderings of in this
case the universe what we've done is set
up a breakpoint under the history option
here so we're gonna go ahead and hit
that and we're actually gonna stop right
in the middle the debugger probably
something you're all very familiar with
but say at this point we want to
actually go and look at something
interesting something in this sense of
global variables if you go and look up
under the debug menu you'll now see
there's a tools menu and we have
something called the global variables
browser Kristen's gonna go ahead and
make this window a little bit bigger so
we can see some of the more information
in here you see on the left-hand side we
have list of all the shared libraries
that this application knows about and
when Chris selects one the right hand
side is populated with information from
that shared library we can see the name
of the global variables file name the
value these are all standard views that
we can go ahead and reorganize the
column view so we can take the file name
out of the way to look at something a
little more interesting but you can
obviously see an apt it here we have a
lot of symbols in this case 500 that
we're looking at makes it kind of
difficult to find the ones you want so
we've included standard features like a
search field at the top Chris you could
go ahead and type in something for
example NSF and go ahead and filter all
those global variables sounds are the
ones that start with a common prefix
something relatively easy to do but it
makes it very easy to find something by
name not necessarily is interesting
let's go and look at something forced
it's the last your application chris can
go ahead and click on that and we're
going to load the symbols for
the Celestra application once it's done
populating Christmas gonna have to go
ahead and remove the search field
olicity typed in so you can get the
prompt Ian's of values back now that we
see that let's go ahead and search on
something more interesting what if you
don't actually know the name of your
global variable but you know for example
it's an int we can go ahead and change
the search to look based on type as we
see here and Kristen can go ahead and
type in int and now we can see you can
actually go find the global variables by
type making it very easy to go ahead and
look at them so we made it very easy to
deal with the concept of large amounts
of global variables but how do you get
this into your workflow well you'll see
that there's a nice little column here
called view and you can go ahead and
check those corsican go ahead and select
a couple of them once we do that if you
close the global variables browser and
go back to the standards above the
review you'll note in the variables
display there's an element called
Global's but now when he expands it
you'll see the global variables so
giving the facility to take something as
large as global variable and bring it
down to a standard workforce on the same
concept of this let's talk about designs
Chris you want to show them the new
design features of extra sure thanks men
now you got a taste of the design
features this morning in vert Rhonda and
on Grace's presentation when they did
the core data model for the core data
framework presentation this is a new
feature of Xcode where we are going to
add design features throughout the
workflow from the beginning of your
application design all the way through
deployment in debugging and the first
two plugins for design are here on your
Xcode to point OCD you've already seen
the core data one this morning we're
going to show you the class plug-in this
afternoon now what's matts going to do
is he's going to take to celestia
application and he's going to create a
new class model of some of the classes
in the celestia source code so he picks
the class model gives it a name a class
models a project file like any other
project file is stored in your project
directory it's committed to your
subversion or CVS repository he's going
to pick set of sources folder and he's
going to make a tracking model he's
going to add that to his group
and now he has a model of the sources in
that folder now these are the classes
now you've probably been familiar with
other applications that give you a
snapshot or a bird's-eye view of the
classes in your application but it's
pretty static it's how the the IDE
communicates with you what the classes
are what you can do with the design
tools and Xcode is you can use the class
model to communicate to other people
what they are so you can move these
classes around you can expand them or
collapse them to show their methods and
their functions and you can make the
design look like how you think the
application works save it with your
project and then when other people
download or check out your project and
open it up they can explore it using the
class model that you've created now this
is of course wired to the project what
maps going to do is going to select a
method in one class he's going to go
straight to the implementation that's
fairly easiest easy and obvious he's
going to go back and using the menu
who's going to go to the definition in
the header file and you can also because
all of your classes may defend from
classes in the Apple frameworks which
have documentation behind them he can
select the class and go to its
documentation in the online
documentation instantly you can go
either to the object itself or directly
to the method of the property on the
object so these design features are all
built in now you've seen what we can do
with modeling your classes but you're
probably wondering hey why do I have to
create a you know separate file and
store it in the repository and in the
project and you're probably wondering
about scalability you know how does it
do one really well now first what we're
going to do is show that it's tracking
it's live it's connected to your project
so as you change your project the model
changes with you so what maps going to
go do now is he's going to add another
folder of sources to the model and there
they go in the design automatically
updates
to show new classes if you add them or
remove them that's also true for methods
and properties in the classes themselves
so now you're wondering well why do I
have to create a model and store it in
the project if I just want to take a
look at somebody else's project and see
how its laid out or take a look at an
apple framework and and how does it
scale the big frameworks anyway well
this is why we have this feature called
quick models in the class model you just
select any group a framework a group of
project at target choose quick model and
it'll create a model right them in there
and this is a document that is a kind of
a temporary document it's thrown away at
the end of the session but we've just
modeled app kit and here are all of the
classes and all of the categories and
all of the protocols in all of app kid
it's about 400 and all and it was
generated in less than half a second and
so you can throw this way because you
can generate it in half second whenever
you need to look at it and of course
this will of course navigate to the app
get headers and to the app get
documentation so the design tools in the
class modeling tool in Xcode is new it's
great it'll help you understand your
code it'll help you communicate your
code to other others and it'll help you
navigate through your code and the Apple
code thanks very much
thanks Matt and Chris by the way of
course great use of that is put it up on
the wall in the hallway your boss or
thinking really doing something you can
find out more about that friday at nine
in the modeling and design in xcode
session are in north beach so this is I
think one of the terrific news features
i think is one of the starring great
things in XO two point oh and a reason
that to use both extra 2 point 0 and 15
now let's turn our attention to the
compiler in the runtime in first let's
give a little bit of a road map because
we saw a lot of version numbers out and
if you're not on the GCC mailing list he
may lose track GC c295 is really the
oldest compiler anybody is likely to be
using and it generated code to g3 and g4
but didn't generate any of those 64-bit
35 instructions 295 it's a compiler that
we keep around because it supports
original 10 dot one text file format but
other than that it really is no great
reasons be using 295 anymore the last
compiler not the current compiles the
last compiler in CC CC 1 and a 2 didn't
generate code for g5 the next compiler
is just is the currency pilot that
everyone should be using is GCC 33 and
it has great support for optimization
great support for the g5 and so with
this coming release we're going to
obsolete some compiler now I'd like to
obsolete both to 9000 31 but some people
still want to shift on getting that one
pic text so what we're going to do is
we're going to get rid of the 31
compiler and we're going to have the GCC
two lines hard to be download only and
we think that that's a reasonable
compromise offerings so the current
compiler 33 is the best is the compiler
should be using for shipping products
and this makes room for GCC 35 this is
the leading edge compiler this compiler
has terrific new optimization features a
brand-new c++ poor sir it has a also
support for long doubles and 35 really
is where most of the attention
happening in the Free Software
Foundation in the GCC community and if
you look at it 35 is is really something
you want to start getting into give us
some feedback on it now putting it on
the developer tools distribution so that
you can begin working with it but of
course it's only in preview mode the big
lifting in 35 is in the performance
improvements and the we've totally
retrofitting the optimization technology
something called a single static
assignment SS a form is really the the
professional and best way to do
cogeneration optimization it's a little
bit like register renaming for those of
you who are familiar with the hardware
world and what it does is essentially
treat every expression that is
computable as a separate arithmetic
expression inside the compiler the
compiler can n do incredibly good
scheduling and overlapping and such that
also gives you the ability that very
fine-grained control and another
terrific feature called o vectorization
we've heard a lot this morning about the
GPU processing in fact as well the
powerpc of course also has in it the
Alpha Zac velocity engine processor and
that allows us to have this additional
processing in parallel in addition to
the GPU but on ships are terrific
capability now previously in order to
take advantage of alpha deck you had to
hand write your own intrinsics it has a
right essentially very low-level
instructions and pay and do the
formatting to your instructions so that
all your data types began and ended on
it on a 16-byte boundary but with auto
vectorization would essentially say hey
let's let the compiler do it so the
pilot can worry about those details and
so instead of having to write the order
back to re-encode yourself the order
vector Iser converts the code and
operates and identifies your most most
common loops it works best with memory
allowing data so if you can structured
so that your blocks of memory are on 16
by the lines chunks that's terrific but
it doesn't have to be and there are
annotations to tell GCC to go and put in
and try to keep this
the beginning of a data structure on a
16 by the lineman but that's not always
possible the compiler will compensate
and put in the correct prologue and
epilogue code for those loops so what's
the payoff well this at the time I made
these slides are we were able to execute
are these types of instructions in
parallel when you have these kinds of
arithmetic expressions inside of a loop
we can see anywhere from a 4x
improvement for its of a vector of
values we executed in parallel up to 12
and even 14 X in fact some late-breaking
data some tests that I just read this
morning have it up to 20 X performance
improvement so really amazing amazing
improvement that you can get for mortar
vectorization for some codes and we
think that you're going to like using
this feature because it's really very
simple to use you just enable it with
one checkbox that sort of vectorization
now let's turn our attention to 64 bit
64-bit ARM is something that we had in
fact on tampa it's in part of the g5
access to our greater than 4 gigabytes
of ram but it also we also gave you this
flag in GCC in xcode to compile for g5
architecture and this actually did give
gives you from c c++ objective-c source
code to 64-bit arithmetic operations so
long long can already fit in one
register and we think the distance is
already something that you should be
using on g 5a me today on Panther in but
what do we actually need with 64-bit
memory why do you want to break the 64
of the four gigabytes barrier and we
think that in fact a great many
application certainly those eight
megapixel displays are going to give you
lots of opportunity to display all this
great data or the supervision so also
now new vistas of media genomics
proteomics medical engineering and one
of my favorite geospatial applications
now become possible not to say that we
didn't already have techniques for
sliding through larger than four
gigabytes of there but it was cumbersome
in orbit so I'd like to have
Peter's give you a demo of a geospatial
application can we have this demo
machine Ted we're looking at Terra
vision it's an open source app that i
downloaded from the net tara fishing is
a visualization app for terrain data and
lets you see terrain data in 3d it's a
32-bit application that takes advantage
of a variety of Mac OS 10 graphics frame
works behind the scenes there's a 64-bit
service application a service process I
built that using the tiger preview and
the tool chain and lid see readied for
64-bit sure let's let's give it a go so
this is a computation not a movie and as
we move through this data set will
encounter more and more complicated
terrain train pieces going from
topographical data yet somebody
shimmering off to the east Landsat data
around the Bay Area and finally this
patch of high-altitude aircraft imagery
data which gets us down to a resolution
of about a meter anybody recognize that
feature in the mid Bay at Stanford
Stadium and will swing around to see I
think that's my house yeah university in
Palo Alto you can see the apple store
down there I always wanted to visit
Stanford's that will roll up this way
and see the main academic quad and palm
the palm drive a little run up to the
dish this is where the radio astronomy
towers are sighted and then we'll sprint
down actually sprint north towards flac
in the foreground of the experimental
halls and then the linear accelerator
running off two kilometers into the
background and there's a curious feature
about slack it passes under highway 280
so I'd like to acknowledge the creators
of Terra vision Martin ready Yvonne
Leclerc and Lee Iverson they did this at
sra a few years ago and the take home
message here is
wood tiger preview you can start to
experiment with application
architectures that employ processing
64-bit service processes like the ones
we've shown you today check it out see
if your app would benefit from some
64-bit goodness and enjoy the ride
Thanks better so 64-bit addressing and
tiger essentially gives you access is
much larger data sets how large well we
quickly learn more about it by the way
in the on Wednesday at 1030am in
presidio with the programming for Mac OS
10 session on 64-bit we're doing a
staged rollout so initially we're
focusing on the lib system functionality
basic i/o capabilities that you need and
the capabilities to map it from a 32-bit
address spaces are into a 64-bit address
space 64-bit is an amazing number and if
you're a geek like me you love big
numbers how is how biggest isn't 64
world 16 exabytes it's that large number
which I'm not going to read or 18 times
10 to the 18th and here you're starting
to the training and exponential numbers
are going to come in very handy really
it's it's having access to these much
larger data sets really is going to
change to some extent the way you think
about data and data management and what
you just saw in the application of speed
demonstrated is essentially we have a 32
bit gooey front damn right but it talks
to a 64-bit service address space that
service address space can do a lot of
the heavy lifting it can access it a
uniform memory environment but the
32-bit address space essentially is
mapping in the data structures that are
needed to present the course in fact
frankly there really is no great benefit
to doubling the size of a pointer that
points to a window there's only acts
benefits to be derived from points into
your memory that has your actual data in
it and so we believe that this is a very
convenient architecture it's one that's
extremely scalable and it's one that
gives you the benefits of 64-bit without
having to have to take the big plunge
support your entire application from
32-bit to 64-bit so this is what we mean
by it's a kind of a scalable
architecture so
for a bit computing and as you can see
we've already demonstrated that it
actually works and does actually give
great performance today we will actually
talk a little bit about the future
because I believe that 64-bit has some
incredibly interesting emergent
properties when we made the transition
from 16-bit data to 32-bit data it's not
that we all of a sudden had the
capabilities to do object-oriented
programming and computer graphics in an
incredibly intense way in that
transition it's not to say that you
couldn't do object or easy programming
in a 16-bit address space it's just what
is all that useful or necessary
applications didn't have to scale that
large the functionality wasn't all that
impressive going from the 16-bit space
to 32-bit space all of a sudden now
certain capabilities and technologies
became very easy in uniform and I
believe the same thing will happen now
as we move from 32-bit space into 64-bit
space now we have an amazing amazing
capabilities to access just a breath a
breath of data and so I think of this is
kind of a super vision right we have
this ability now to look at scales of
universe and of data to make seamless
transitions between data sets are so
that detect you know your locality
search say instead of google being you
know zip code because pinpoint where you
are on the globe zoom in there you are
ok what's there it's so it's going to
unlock incredible vistas and I'd love to
see the applications you folks are going
to develop with the 64-bit tools we're
providing to you today that's 64 bit
let's talk about the next generation
runtime again this is a little
forward-looking we are working on
garbage collection why do you want
garbage collection well it simplifies
coding especially in the threaded multi
as a multi-threaded world where events
are generated both by the network by the
user by perhaps other other people and
it can incredibly conclude correctness
of your applications and improve the
memory efficiency of what you're doing
so what we've been cooking up in the lab
is semi automatic memory management for
objective-c it's fast it has very low
lake recedes designed for interactive
applications and it's optional you don't
have to use it you can on a per
application basis or you can either
enable it or not enabled it's binary
compatible with the frameworks that will
be shipping
and we believe that that applications
should begin experimenting with this
kind of a rad feature when it comes out
in targets so we really don't understand
yet the complete balance yet between
high performance applications and the
amount of memory footprint it has so
this is something where we will be
making this technology available in the
target time frame and I think it's going
to be very interesting but this is not a
journey that last in one year right this
is something that we will explore
together to figure out different ways to
tune this technology but I believe it's
going to make a very big improvement to
productivity of and debugging of
applications instead of having to do
some sort of the retain release style
programming that we do today in
Objective C and C++ we will have
techniques there say you know what when
we want it to leak when it's no longer
be referenced by anyone it can just be
the garbage collector we claim it so
this is cooking up some labs and I'm
very excited by this the other side of
things is performance tools so for once
tools we provide help you make your
application great one of my favorite
performance tools is shark what is shark
shark is a a multi-purpose tool we've
enhanced it with functionality merging
in capabilities such as sampler into
shark and what it does is the profile is
everything all the way from the device
driver level to the colonel to the
applications it has extremely low
overhead and it works both in a static
and the dynamic Wade annotates the
source code and disassembly codes and
gives you optimization tips so let's
bring on mason finland and sanjay patel
to give us a quick demo of shark
good afternoon I'm really proud to
announce that we have a preview version
of shark on your tiger preview disk and
we're also going to be available shortly
off the FTP sites with a new version of
shark and what I'd like to do is just
demo some of the features in shark I
think the best way to do that is with an
open source application that we think
was rather cool we found it out on the
web called Celestia which you guys
already saw with Chris and Matt and it's
a simulation of the universe's it's
really nice it actually uses real data
from JPL to calculate the orbits of the
planets and stars and what we wanted to
do was see how this application runs on
a Mac so here's the less you're running
and what did what you have to do if
you're going to optimize for performance
is that a little metric so we decided to
figure out how long it takes to run
through this demo and now if we launch
shark you can see that we've added lots
of features to shark but the main thing
we had to do was make sure that it was
still very easy to use and the default
workflow for most people is simply to
hit the start button so right now we're
actually taking samples of the system so
we're sampling not only celestia all the
others are all the running processes on
the system by default once per
millisecond if we it stops we're now
going to process all those samples that
we took you can see by default we've got
in what we call the heavy view and this
is ordered from time spent in the
topmost function down now you can also
look and say that we've sampled the
entire system silesia is taking up a
little less than half of the CPU cycles
on this system you can see we have a
thread top-ups to show you all your
threads of execution so let's do a
single threaded that explains why it's
not getting all of the CPU resources on
a dual processor max now we can also
look at celestia in what the more
traditional tree view so you can see
your code executing all the way from
Maine down new for shark 40 you can
actually view heavy and three
simultaneously so that was a big request
we've added what we call data mining
features as well so we get a contextual
men
as well as this side drawer which lets
you filter out things that you don't
want to see for example the system
library you can also color your code so
it's very easy to figure out where
you're spending time now one area we've
really improved is the chart view so
this is a chronological view of your
programs execution in this case we have
two processors so we have two charts now
we know that celestia is single threaded
at this point so let's just focus in on
its one thread of execution
chronologically now a big feature we
added with the zoom slider they can zoom
in and out and get a you click on the
stack so along the x-axis we have time
and along the y axis we have stacks if
and you can click or mouse around
through here and you can see your stack
at any point during your programs
execution so now if we go back to the
profile view nope probably the coolest
feature I think of shark is if you
double click on a function and we found
this one function in particular called
big fix that we're going to look at you
see your source code but you don't just
see your source code it's actually
annotated and it's highlighted and what
we did was we made the brighter the
yellow is it's more important for your
code that's the more important time
consuming line of source and so you can
see also shark is going to offer you
advice when it can these are these
exclamation points so for example we
have this floating point to integer
conversion now this is really bad for a
g5 because it causes a serial a
serialization of the pipeline now new
for shark is the fact that we can look
at both source and assembly
simultaneously so you can see it exactly
what the compiler generated for each
line of sorts
and when you highlight on a line of sort
it automatically highlights and Scrolls
the lines of assembly that courts onto
each line now for me I generally speak
powerpc as well as i do English so we
know that's not true for most people so
we have this PVC Help button down in the
corner and you can see it's actually
updating as we scroll through it updates
in gives you a description in English of
what each mnemonic is that's really cool
and so it's really great to be able to
focus in on your performance hot spot
right away and we have this nice edit
button now and this will jump you right
into Xcode and the line that's
highlighted in your shark viewer is now
highlighted in Xcode so you can edit
away so if we go back to Celestia you
can see as this demo has already been
running for over four minutes and this
is a original code when we got it we
decided we should spend some time
optimizing it based on what shark is
told us and you can see we would did
nine steps now we don't have much time
here so let's just show you warp three
for a second here if we restart the demo
you can see that we're going to do a
flight through the universe we're going
to stop around Saturn go off to one of
its moons
and pretty soon here will be done now
that's not bad originally this demo took
over a thousand seconds to run so we
made some improvements at warp 3 but we
weren't done we decided we should write
altivec code we should do some t5
optimizations we should unroll some
loops we should schedule code better and
the sum of all that is what we call warp
nine and if we take a look at that
I got the demo to be a little bit over
three hundred times faster from where we
started using short
once they put up the URL i think lexi is
a wonderful application by itself so it
send more than five seconds looking at
it there are lots more tools performance
tools shark is terrific and such but
also be able to look at your memory
allocations where is it going very often
an application to take that is slow it's
not the questions algorithmically slow
but because it's taking up too much
memory features that also short has is
to be able to profile on set up the
events of when allocations happen there
also are standalone applications that
you can leverage and work with without
the GUI mouth debug object Alec quartz
debug for looking to see your course
allocation sampler spin control is a
great thing when you see the the pizza
the quad-city spinning cursor to
understand what it is the application is
doing great great thing thread viewer
accessibility inspectors and verifiers
very very important a lot of both both
to make your application accessible to
the unsighted the terrific new set of
capabilities in Mac OS 10 and give you
the tools to help make your application
accessible so lots and lots of
performance tools and analysis tools on
developed CD it's worthwhile to to
explore it in their sessions on all
these features xcode is in many ways the
the gateway to to the frameworks on the
system and you heard this morning and
from retron about a number of the
terrific SDKs and tools spotlight the
great new SDK dashboard core data all
these SDKs have both many medications
have additional tools for example quartz
composer to better understand how the
filters interact so it's a terrific me
to spend some time and leverage this
core data is a terrific SDK that unlocks
the virtues of persistence and database
properties oriented programming I think
one of my favorites though is going to
be the Automator and automator SDK and
let's bring on
Tim Bumgarner and Todd Fernandez to give
us a demo of the Automator action if TK
well thank you very much dead and good
afternoon developers I hope that you all
got a chance to see automator this
morning in the keynote while sal did a
great job of showing off automated user
side and tim is taking advantage of it
right now I'm sorry it's already done
running a workflow to set up our demo
we're here to show you the developer
side and the first thing we want to do
is show you an action you did not see
this morning an action that allows you
to create a new email and if you take a
look at the actions user interface and
Tim please bring up the people picker
you'll see that something's missing
there's no BCC support so in order to
show you how easy it is to create
automator actions Tim and I are going to
add that support for you now and to do
that there's three main steps we need to
update our actions user interface we
need to add to connect the connections
between the new user interface elements
and our code and finally we need to add
our source code in Apple scripts and
objective-c so Tim please open the
project in Xcode two point oh and the
first thing to notice here is that this
is a native target native targets now
support apple script so let's go ahead
and open the NIV an interface builder
and there's our new text field to hold
the BCC addresses and we've added a BCC
button to the people picker and we've
already wired that up to a new ad BCC
items method now what we have left to do
is to use cocoa bindings to bind the
value of that new text field to the BCC
addresses to a new variable strangely
enough call BCC addresses and we've got
that all sets the police save the nib
Tim and let's get back to Xcode
so now that we have cocoa binding
settings this new variable DCC addresses
we need to actually use it in our script
which is used is used to manage the
actions user interface so Tim go ahead
and add a line of code to read the BCC
addresses out of the parameters block
which is managed for with for us by Coco
binding and here we're showing off in
another great new feature in X go to
point o that we now have code completion
for applescript excellence and it saves
that and famous you can just give us a
brief tour that we already have the the
rest of the Apple script code analogous
to what we already had for the two and
CC addresses and down at the bottom
we're taking advantage of males great
script ability to add the new DCC
recipients to the new email message that
the action will create for us alright
that's all we needed to do in our script
so let's please save that Tim and
finally what we need to do is open up an
objective c class and take a look at
that new ad BCC items method and really
all we needed to do was copy and paste
and change 3 cc's to be cc's to read the
value from the people picker and add it
to the text field so great that's all we
needed to do this add to this new
feature so Tim if you would hit build
and go please and we'll save our script
and what we're doing here is taking
advantage of a custom Automator
executable to the great Xcode feature
which has a launch argument which passes
the newly built action to Automator when
we launch it directly from Xcode this
gives us a very efficient development
cycle and very much like building a
normal application so let's add our new
our new new email action to the workflow
and we see it's got a BCC field and the
people picker has the button that allows
us to add new addresses to that field so
timmis use bcc me please and let's send
a message to Ted since he's been so
gracious as to let us share his stage
and CC Tony and let's tell them look
what a great combination that Automator
and Xcode to point o our that's kind of
a boring email so let's make it a little
bit more interesting let's let's add an
image to it strangely enough an image of
another great combination and let's go
ahead and run the workflow and there's
our email with the beat VCC field
correctly filled out and we've got the
Venus transit a couple weeks back
so in a few short minutes we've shown
you how easy it is to use your
development language of choice to create
Automator actions and I hope that you'll
all join me tomorrow morning at
ten-thirty in the mission for a full
session explaining just how easy it is
to create a rich set of actions for your
applications thanks very much dead thank
God thanks Anna so yes tomorrow morning
1030 I think automator and we are
connecting up applications going to be a
very incredible thing we're asking all
the application developers to really to
think about in exposed very simple to
expose an applescript interface and add
these actions you can actually add
automated actions in really the language
of your choice it's very simple to do it
with Apple script but it doesn't require
applescript there's many tips different
ways to do this really very simple set
of nibs that can be copied dragged and
pasted into the your project and to
really enable this is a very as a
terrific way to do it this technology
grows out of work done to also enable
UNIX shell scripting and many kinds of
things so this is the foundational piece
of Technology's I think you're going to
see a lot of exciting things happening
in some terrific way for many
applications to become very integrated
and to leverage the capabilities from
one application to another for our
customers benefits so to summarize Xcode
continues to advance for Panther and
tiger are we think that Xcode is helping
people to build faster applications in
less time so including both the
performances of your applications both
with compiled code and generated code
and by taking advantage of new
performance capabilities we think it's
going to be extremely important to
automator enable your application and we
think the next code is really the new
foundation for a large number of
terrific things now I know many of you
have seen that a few of us around here
sporting these great shirts i want to
invite which Siegel and Gabrielle state
back up here want to hand them some
shirts for being some of the first
applications we're showing developed in
Xcode Henry masseur
thank you thank you and you have a
little other little demo to show yeah so
so while Ted was getting everything
ready and showing off that automated
demo I thought gee you know I really
hope that Apple concentrates on security
for that stuff because it can be really
important you know in the tron game we
get the sound there they'll be great no
sound on try and gain a little problem
yeah that's the danger of some of the
stuff i'm sure you guys will do a great
job little email scripts can run them up
exactly thanks a lot gave so we have a
few more shirts here but the fact when
you come down to the apple campus on
thursday we're going to have a lot more
and if you bring your application
running on a laptop and show us your
application building in xcode then we'll
have a shirt for you as well so i'm
going to throw out of you now
hahahahaha the only a few today you've
got to show us your applications
building an Xcode so thank you very much
and have a great conference
[Applause]